
    _Piracy in the past has acquired the gaudy technicolor of high
    romance. In the present, piracy is as tawdry as tabloid headlines.
    But piracy in the far future, when presented as vividly as in this
    story, can be scary stuff._


    this
     one
 problem

 _by ... M. C. Pease_


 The shortest distance between two points may be
 the long way around--and a path of dishonor may
 well turn into the high road to virtue.


Marc Polder, Resident Comptroller of Torran, strolled idly down the
dusty littered path that passed for a street. In the half-light of the
pint-sized moon overhead the town looked almost romantic. One day, when
civilization had at last been brought to these Asteroid bases, memory
would make Torran heroic. But now, with the fact before the eyes, it was
merely dirty and squalid. Only the scum of the Solar System called it
home.

Idly Marc Polder pushed a swinging door aside and entered what passed on
Torran for a restaurant. Pushing his way through the tables until he saw
his only aide, Female Personnel Manager Lee Treynor, he sat down.

"What's new?" he asked.

"Not a thing." But for a certain softness of voice and curve of
unmade-up lips, Lee could have passed for a boy. Her light hair was
short, she wore a man's coveralls. She added, "Only the usual murder,
arson and brigandage that you don't want to hear about."

"Don't let such trifles get you down," said Marc with a crooked
half-smile.

"I'm fed up," the girl said shortly. "I must have been still wet behind
the ears when I agreed to come out here two months ago. I thought I was
going to help establish a place where decent people could live and work.
So far I've just watched my boss swig Venerian swamp beer with the worst
elements in town, and do nothing about the lawlessness that runs riot
all over the place."

"Look, lady," Marc answered gently, "I certainly admire those lofty
sentiments of yours. I admit they are maybe what ought to be. But the
way I see it they just don't fit the facts. Out here the Federation
space fleet is supposed to be the big stick. Only right now it's off
playing mumbly-peg with the Venerians.

"The Big Wheels seem to think there'll be a shooting war in a couple of
months. There's only three or four destroyers left in the whole damn
Asteroid Belt. And without the big stick behind me I'm not hankering to
commit suicide by looking for trouble."

Marc smiled again ruefully. "What I can do I try to do," he added with
sudden earnestness. "I figure the most important thing is to protect the
Asteroid Development Company so they can buy the nuclear ore the
Astrodites bring in. Without that ore the Federation's going to be in a
hell of a fix if it actually does come to war. And along with that
there's the matter of guarding the stuff the Navy's got stored here." He
waved toward the Navy warehouse that could be seen outside the window.

"Listening to and fraternizing with the characters you call the biggest
crooks in town," the comptroller went on with a shrug, "I've a chance at
getting tipped off in advance to anything that may make trouble for our
interests. As long as I ignore their rackets they accept me in their
midst, talk freely with me around. And it's a hell of a lot easier to
stop something when you know the score beforehand."

The young woman's lips parted as if she seemed about to say something.
Then they closed in a thin line. Obviously she was not happy with Marc
Polder's explanation. She was too young to be willing to compromise her
ideals, no matter how potent the logic of necessity.

She was about to leave the table when the shrill screams of a distant
whistle sliced through the noise of the crowd. Voices broke off in
mid-sentence and bodies froze into immobility. As the siren's piercing
tones faded the restaurant's customers looked at one another in silent
terror. Then, as the shock wore off and unanswered questions were
beginning to fly, a man suddenly ran in through the revolving doors.

"Raiders!" he gasped. "The listening gear's picked up a signal that's
not from any Astrodite or destroyer. Signal Corps figures it's a
pirate!"

There was a mad rush for the doors and seconds later the place was empty
except for Marc Polder, still sitting calmly at the table drinking his
beer, and Lee Treynor who sat watching him.

"What are you going to do?" she finally asked.

"I don't know. What _can_ I do?" Marc said.

"Good heavens!" the girl exploded. "Are you just going to sit there
guzzling beer while pirates take over the town?" She stared at him
incredulously.

"What do you suggest I do?" the comptroller asked. "We haven't anything
to fight with. There's no way we can get help. As far as I can see
there's nothing we _can_ do--not yet anyway." He calmly lifted his
glass.

"You mean we're just going to _sit_ here?" the girl gaped.

"Sure. The others left to hide their money and valuables. I've got
nothing to hide."

"What about that stuff the Navy has cached in their warehouse?" Lee
asked. "That new rocket fuel their destroyers use when they need a
little extra push. Isn't that worth hiding?"

"The hyper-degenerate-thorium, you mean? I'd like to hide that
somewhere," Marc conceded. "But where do you hide ten tons of stuff in
five minutes? Besides, it wouldn't do the raiders any good. Too hot.
It'll burn out their jets. They'd go up like an A-bomb two minutes after
they threw it on. They know that. Only thing they could do with it is
sell it to Venus. Not that that would be bad. Shortage of H.D.T.'s may
be the chief reason why there's been no war started yet. But for now
there's nothing you and I can do." Calmly he lit a cigarette.

"Of course," he went on, smiling, "we _could_ bum a ride out with some
of the company men. No doubt they're all hightailing it away from here
in their space-buggies."

"I'm surprised," Lee said with a trace of sarcasm, "that you're not
doing just that, leaving me and the other women to the beasts!"

Marc eyed her unblinkingly. "You know as well as I do that most of the
females on this asteroid take pirates in their stride. They might even
welcome a change of partners. As for you"--he paused--"you stick close
to me and keep your pretty mouth shut. I think we'll manage somehow."

In silence they walked back to the comptroller's office.

"Marc," Lee said as they entered, "what about the new radar? Maybe we
could get a message out with it, in code or something."

"What?" Marc turned, astonished. "You want to play our only hole-card on
an off-chance like that? There aren't more than four or five people
here who even know it's been set up on the other side of the asteroid.
There's hardly a chance the raiders will find out about it. And you want
to blast the news at them!" He looked disgusted.

The girl said stubbornly, "You can't just give up without a fight. And
that's our only weapon."

"Look," Marc said grimly, "that's only a second-hand destroyer radar, so
it wouldn't carry far. No. I'm not going to use it on any such
harebrained scheme as that. And if you breathe a word about it I'll take
you apart." He added with a faint smile, "Not that _that_ wouldn't be a
pleasure."

Looking at him she knew he meant the tender joke and the knowledge
helped her.

"I think," Marc went on after a moment, "I'd better warn the boys over
on the radar project or they might accidentally start it up while the
raiders are here." He closed the door as he went into the inner office
to make the call.

A moment later he emerged and studied the still angry girl through
half-closed eyes. She blushed under his scrutiny, said coldly, "What's
the matter? Afraid I'm not attractive enough for our visitors?"

He grinned. "You could do with a mite of padding here and there. But I
was thinking the other way, as a matter of fact. It's a pity you don't
have a small mustache."

"You don't have to insult me!" Lee cried bitterly. "I'm _glad_ I'm
thin!"

"I'm not insulting you," Marc said mildly. "I even wish you were a bit
skinnier. It's the plump girls our guests are going to be looking at
first. Remember now--you stick right with me and keep your mouth shut,
d'you hear?"

"I hear," she said shortly. But he could see the fear she was trying to
hide and he knew she was honestly frightened for the first time in her
adult life. She said, "What will they--be like?"

"If it's John Mantor, and I suspect it is, they'll be rough," Marc
informed her. "He's a tough ex-pilot who got bounced off Space Patrol
and turned outlaw. He seems to hold a grudge against the whole human
race. If it's one of the others--it may be a lot worse."

"I don't see why outlaws are allowed to exist at all," she said.

Marc sighed, shook his head. "A lot of people have felt that way over a
lot of pirates over a lot of eras. But somehow they keep turning up."

A few minutes later the space-scarred pirate ship had made a rocky
landing in the middle of the small spaceport and John Mantor, pirate
chief, drove up to the comptroller's office in a cloud of dust. He was
tall and dirty and thin and tough. "Which one of you is the
comptroller?" he demanded, as he faced Marc Polder and Lee Treynor.

"I am," Marc said, not rising from behind the desk.

"Then you're the guy responsible for any trouble here," Mantor said. "So
I'm going to tell you how to avoid trouble." His brutally scarred face
twisted into a grin.

"There's a lot of loot around here. I'm not going to ask you where it
is. My boys can take care of that matter. But there's also the Navy
warehouse. Maybe we won't know what some of the stuff in there is for,
so you're going to tell us."

Mantor leaned across the desk, his eyes as hard and cold as chips of
duratite. "And if you won't, there's going to be trouble and you'll be
it--you and your friend here."

Marc sat impassively, meeting the hard-eyed gaze. "That warehouse is
government property," he said. "So far, there's only piracy against you.
But if you raid that building you're going to be the personal problem of
the Navy. If I were you I'd leave it alone."

"You let me worry about that," said Mantor.

"Besides," Marc went on, "I don't see what good the stuff in that
warehouse can be to you. There's little of cash value in there. And I
doubt if you can use any of the parts on your ship."

"That could be," Mantor replied. "But on the other hand, maybe we can
find a market for certain items." He smiled coldly. Watching, Lee knew
he referred to Venus. She sat perfectly still, praying for him not to
notice her.

Mantor spread his hands on the desk, a look of hatred and ferocity on
his face. "What I want to know is--are you or are you not going to
cooperate? And I want to know fast."

"Don't get me wrong," Marc said softly. "I'm not telling you what to do
or what not to do. But that warehouse is the thing I'm here to protect.
And if I were to agree to help you, the Navy would be after me, too. So
I've got to say to hell with you."

John Mantor rocked back on his heels, hooking his thumbs in his belt. A
slow smile spread over his face. "Okay," he said. "I think I get what
you mean. So I guess we got to work you over. And we'll do it where
there aren't any outside witnesses."

Marc grinned back at him.

Lee was puzzled. It took her a moment to realize that the grins sealed a
contract between the two men. Marc would cooperate if he were beaten up
enough first to satisfy a later investigation--but not too severely for
his own comfort!

Lee found it difficult to hide her contempt. She stared at her hands,
clenched in her lap, and waited for Mantor to leave.

The looting and destruction were well under way an hour later when a
couple of Mantor's men joined their chief, who stood with a somewhat
bruised Marc Polder and an unharmed but furious Lee Treynor. Between
them they carried a small, obviously heavy box.

"You know what this stuff is, boss?" one of the men asked. "They got a
hundred or a hundred-fifty boxes like this in there." He nodded at the
Navy warehouse.

They set the box down and Mantor flung back its lid. It was filled with
small grey pellets. Mantor picked up a handful and stood fingering them.

"Looks like rocket fuel," he said. "Only I've never seen any this color.
And it's too heavy, also." He turned to the comptroller. "_You_ tell me
what it is."

Marc shrugged. "I don't know. It's a Navy secret."

Mantor's eyes glinted. Without warning his fist flew out, sent the
comptroller sprawling in the dust where he lay stunned. Lee's hands flew
to her mouth barely in time to suppress a cry.

After a few moments Marc rolled over slowly and pushed himself painfully
to a sitting position. He looked up at Mantor who stood watching him
coldly, his fist flexing.

The comptroller licked his lips and looked around at the several men who
stood watching, their faces impassive. "Okay," he said in a
none-too-steady voice. "I'll tell you. You'd find out anyway from the
files."

"Cut the alibis and give," Mantor growled.

"Keep your shirt on." Marc's voice indicated he was regaining control of
himself. "It's H.D.T.--Hyper-Degenerate-Thorium--the stuff the
destroyers use to get extra push."

Mantor roared his glee. "Pack it aboard, boys--_all_ of it! And put it
where it will be handy, just in case."

This was it, Lee thought as she stood by, watching--the final bitter
pill. Mantor had as much as told them he was working for Venus. And the
H.D.T. was all Venus needed to be ready for war--a war that might well
blast civilization from the Solar System. Strange that so much should
depend upon one man; tragic that the one man was a weakling.

With an effort Lee forced herself to be fair. It might have done no good
to lie, she conceded. But anyone with even a normal amount of simple
courage would have tried.

It was about two hours later when the siren went off again like a
banshee wailing to a low-hanging moon. Men came running from all
directions, shouting questions at the tops of their voices.

A midget auto came skidding down the pirate ship's ramp, its driver
standing on the accelerator. The car knifed through the swirling crowd,
barely missing several people, and skidded to a dusty stop directly in
front of Mantor.

"_Radar signal!_" the driver yelled. "The search receiver picked up a
signal that sounds like a destroyer's radar. It suddenly came in strong.
Probably sneaked up on us from behind that damn moon. It's coming in
fast and braking hard!"

There was a mad scramble as the looters raced for their ship.
Heavy-handed horseplay was forgotten. They knew they were helpless
against a Navy destroyer. Their only hope lay in a fast getaway. Seconds
could easily spell the difference between safety and defeat.

In less than ten minutes the ship's locks were sealed and they fired
off. As the flames roared out and the huge ship lifted swiftly it was
obvious that they were throwing on all the fuel their jets could take.

Marc Polder had faded back into the crowd at the first sound of the
siren. As he stood watching the blastoff Lee joined him, hands in her
pockets, looking more than ever like a boy.

"Maybe my idea of asking for help wasn't so far-fetched," she said
quietly. "Maybe the patrol might have been here in time. Maybe you
wouldn't have had to tell them about the H.D.T."

"Maybe," Marc answered without turning his eyes from the dwindling point
of reddish light high in the dark sky.

"And just by way of keeping the record straight," the girl went on in a
voice that began to rasp, "you know as well as I do that the files don't
list any H.D.T. It's under a code name."

"Maybe," Marc replied in a noncommittal tone.

The point of light in the sky suddenly turned blue. Lee was staring at
it too, now. And she knew also what the change of color meant. Mantor
had started to use the new fuel!

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly there was a blinding flash. Lee cried out and staggered back,
covering her eyes. Marc, who had closed his eyes when the color change
came, took hold of the girl's arm.

"I told you what would happen if they used the stuff," he said gently.
"It's too hot for their jet chambers. It melts the walls. A lot of gas
piles up in the tubes. The pressure pushes the fire back. And when it
gets shoved back into the recoil chamber and you lose the protective
layers of cold gas there--well, then you've got to look for your ship
with an ionization gauge!

"I told you all that long ago. The trouble is, you're too idealistic,
Lee. That's not the same as _having ideals_. I admire ideals--I might
even confess to a few of my own. But _you_ don't stop to figure out just
what your ideals are--exactly what you're fighting for.

"You come to a crisis like this one and you forget about the _big_ goal.
All you see is this one problem. And by giving them yes-or-no
answers--good or bad, brave or cowardly--to the problem of the
moment--you may miss a simple solution to the big one.

"You've got to keep a cool head and never forget for even a moment
exactly what it is you want to accomplish." His voice was gentle, and it
held no rebuke.

"All right," said Lee unhappily, "you win. You needn't bother to rub in
the salt. I was going to chase you through all the inquiry courts for
this. Instead, you got a lucky break, so I can't do a thing. You ought
to be tarred and feathered through every city of the Federation, but
because a destroyer happened to stumble in here at the right time you'll
end up a hero." Her voice caught in a sob.

"Oh, the destroyer," Marc replied. "Ah, yes, that _was_ lucky, wasn't
it? The only hitch is--there wasn't any destroyer. Probably not one
within a million miles!" He laughed as Lee turned surprise-widened eyes
toward him.

"What they thought was a destroyer was the radar system on the side of
the rock, bouncing a signal off the moon. I gave the radar boys the word
just before Mantor dropped in on us. The crew did a damned good job of
juggling the power and frequency and all." He grinned. "Remind me to buy
them a beer sometime."

He laughed then at the girl's expression as it changed from bitter
disillusion to something akin to awe, close to hero-worship.

"And this, by the way," Polder said, "is as good a time as any to tell
you that I'd like to see you look like a woman, for a change. How about
changing into a dress before we go into town. You know, I've never seen
you out of that uniform?"

She hesitated, unsure of herself now. "That will take a little time,"
she said doubtfully.

He put hands on her slim shoulders, gave her a gentle shove toward her
quarters. "We've got time," he told her. "Lots of it. But I've been
waiting quite a while."




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _Fantastic Universe_ March 1954.
    Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of This One Problem, by M. C. Pease

